# LINEs in Plants
## Table of Contents
1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [LINEs in Plants](#lines-in-plants)
3. [Repository Contents](#repository)
4. [Citation](#cite)

## Introduction

Most eukaryotic genomes are made up of repetitive sequences, like introns, intergenic DNA, regulatory sequences, transposons elements (TEs) and spacers should also be considered (Hirsch and Springer, 2017). TEs generally represent more than half of plant genomes and have a high potential to move independently throughout the genome, using different transposition and insertion mechanisms (Lisch, 2013; Mustafin and Khusnutdinova, 2018; Ou, Chen and Jiang, 2018). The transposition itself is already a source of genetic variability, and the different rates of recombination that occur in genomic regions containing these elements have been linked to the formation of new genes and pseudogenes (Kent, Uzunović and Wright, 2017; Mhiri et al., 2022). Most of TEs fraction is under neutral selection, and new traits appear to emerge more rapidly from transposition than from constitutive genes (Underwood, Henderson and Martienssen, 2017; Stitzer et al., 2021).
TEs are divided into two main Classes, I and II, according to the transposition intermediate (Lisch, 2013). Class I elements, or retrotransposons, utilize a “copy-and-paste” transposition mechanism that generates multiple copies that integrate into the genome. These elements possess two essential components central to the retrotransposition process: the reverse transcriptase (RT) enzyme, which converts their own mRNA transcripts into complementary DNA, and an endonuclease (EN/APE/EEP), which facilitates genome integration. Class I elements are further divided into two major groups based on the presence or absence of long terminal repeats (LTRs). LTR retrotransposons contain up to three open reading frames (ORFs) and are classified into five superfamilies: Copia, Gypsy, Bel-Pao, Retrovirus, and ERV (Wicker et al., 2007). In contrast, non-LTR retrotransposons lack these repetitive flanking regions and exhibit diverse structural features. The absence of the LTR and the presence of the poly-A tail clearly distinguish non-LTR-RTs from LTR-RTs (Eickbush and Malik, 2007). non-LTR-RTs present two ORFs and are divided into four orders, which the most common are Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements (LINE) and Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements (SINE) (Wicker et al., 2007; Razali, Cheah and Nadarajah, 2019). The first ones use the endo-exonuclease phosphatase (EEP) for binding the mRNA molecule and the reverse transcriptase (RT) for the transcription, cutting/insertion in the transposition process (Wicker et al., 2007; Razali, Cheah and Nadarajah, 2019).  In addition to the essential domains, there are other domains considered non-essential, as their absence does not prevent the transposition of LINEs or can be replaced by proteins already present in the cells, such as RNH, a domain specialized in the processing of RNA primers (Malik, 2005), or domains that make up ORF1 that perform the function of protection, transport and binding between the intermediate RNA and DNA (Metcalfe and Casane, 2014; Mhiri et al., 2022). It is important to highlight that the composition of ORF1 is quite variable and there is no consensus on domains common to all L1s,  however they may present domains such as: zinc-finger CCHC (Cys2HisCys), RRM (RNA recognition motif) and DUF (Domain of Unknown Function) (Jaroszewski et al., 2009; SenGupta, 2013; El-Gebali et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024). Although non-essential, these domains are important for the identification and classification of LINE elements. Although non-LTR elements have long been identified as non-autonomous, they are now understood to be a distinct group from those with LTRs (Eickbush and Malik, 2007; Metcalfe and Casane, 2014; Mhiri et al., 2022; Razali, Cheah and Nadarajah, 2019).
Based on structural features and phylogenetic analyses, LINEs are grouped into LINE-1 (L1), retrotransposable elements (RTE), I, R2 and jockey. Based on sequence diversification, these five groups further suggest several subdivisions or clades (Kapitonov, Tempel and Jurka, 2009). The general mechanism of retrotransposition of LINEs is known as Target-Primed Reverse Transcription, or TPRT (Ostertag and Kazazian, 2001). In general, this mechanism suggests a strong dependence on the poly A tail (3') for retrotransposition and, because of this, the 5' region where is the ORF-1 would be less conserved (Luan and Eickbush, 1995; Eickbush and Malik, 2007; Mhiri et al. 2022).
In general, retrotransposons without LTRs (non-LTR-RTs) predominate in animals while retrotransposons with LTRs (LTR-RTs) are most common in plant genomes. The Homo sapiens L. 1758 genome contains more than 45% TEs, of which 8.3% are LTR-RT elements, 33.7% are without LTR and 2.8% are transposons (Zhao, Ferguson and Jiang, 2016; Pappalardo et al., 2021). In contrast, more than 80% of the Hordeum vulgare L. 1753 genome is composed of TEs, of which 75% are LTR elements, 0.3% are without LTRs and 5% are transposons (Mascher et al., 2017). Due to the low expression of LINEs in plants, only a few families of LINEs have been described in these genomes (Schwarz-Sommer et al., 1987, Leeton and Smyth, 1993; Wright et al., 1996; Higashiyama et al., 1997; Noma et al., 2000; Sakamoto et al., 2000; Vershinin et al., 2002; Komatsu et al., 2003, Yamashita and Tahara, 2006). However, understanding these sequences and their mechanisms of transition are essential to understanding plant genomes, as well as how they are organized and evolve.
There are several tools for searching, identifying and classifying TEs (Ou et al., 2019; Neumann et al., 2019; Panta et al. 2021; Orozco-Arias et al., 2022; Ren-Gang et al., 2022; Morad, 2023; Rodriguez and Arkhipova, 2023), but these tools are not very accurate when searching for LINEs. The high diversification of UTRs, the absence of LTRs, the degeneration of ORF-1, and the low curation of plant-specific LINEs in the databases have made the work of annotating LINEs very difficult. In this study, we have used two different systems to search for LINEs in plant genomes sequenced by long-read technology. In the first, we started from a restructured and carefully curated database and used alignment tools to screen and annotate the LINEs. In the second, we used machine learning based on K-mers in an alignment-free search for identification and annotation. The comparative analysis took into account the phylogeny, dating (time of insertion and expansion), and localization patterns of LINEs in pseudochromosomes, always comparing species belonging to the major plant groups, from liverworts to angiosperms.
